>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, MAY 21: PRESIDENT TRUMP
ADDRESSES THE THREAT OF
TERRORISM AND CALLS ON ARAB
LEADERS TO CONFRONT EXTREMISM.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE ISSUE OF TEENAGE PREGNANCY.
DO CANDID CONVERSATIONS ABOUT
SEX LOWER THE RATE MORE THAN
TEACHING ABSTINENCE ONLY?
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT TRUMP IS CALLING ON
THE ARAB WORLD TO SHOW UNITY AND
PARTNER WITH THE UNITED STATES
TO COMBAT EXTREMISM AND
TERRORISM.
TODAY, IN THE CAPITAL OF SAUDI
ARABIA, THE PRESIDENT ADDRESSED
A SUMMIT OF LEADERS FROM 50 ARAB
AND MUSLIM-MAJORITY COUNTRIES,
COMPLETING HIS TWO-DAY VISIT TO
THE KINGDOM.
IN HIS 35-MINUTE SPEECH, MR.
TRUMP SAID THE U.S. WILL SEEK
GRADUAL REFORMS OVER
INTERVENTION AND MIDDLE EAST
LEADERS MUST DECIDE FOR
THEMSELVES WHAT KIND OF FUTURE
THEY WANT.
>> IT IS A CHOICE BETWEEN TWO
FUTURES, AND IT IS A CHOICE THAT
AMERICA CANNOT MAKE FOR YOU.
A BETTER FUTURE IS ONLY POSSIBLE
IF YOUR NATIONS DRIVE OUT THE
TERRORISTS AND DRIVE OUT THE
EXTREMISTS.
DRIVE THEM OUT.
DRIVE THEM OUT OF YOUR PLACES OF
WORSHIP.
DRIVE THEM OUT OF YOUR
COMMUNITIES.
DRIVE THEM OUT OF YOUR HOLY
LAND.
AND DRIVE THEM OUT OF THIS
EARTH.
>> Stewart: HE CALLED ON THE
LEADERS TO DENY TERRITORY TO
EXTREMISTS LIKE THE ISLAMIC
STATE GROUP, OR ISIS, WHOSE
ROOTS ARE AL QAEDA IN IRAQ.
THE PRESIDENT ANNOUNCED THE
FORMATION OF A NEW "TERRORIST
FINANCING TARGETING CENTER" TO
BE CHAIRED BY THE U.S. AND SAUDI
ARABIA AND JOINED BY PERSIAN
GULF STATES.
>> AS WE DENY TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS CONTROL OF
TERRITORY AND POPULATIONS, WE
MUST ALSO STRIP THEM OF ACCESS
TO FUNDS.
WE MUST CUT OFF FINANCIAL
CHANNELS THAT LET ISIS SELL OIL,
LET EXTREMISTS PAY THEIR
FIGHTERS, AND HELP TERRORISTS
SMUGGLE THEIR REINFORCEMENTS.
>> Stewart: MR. TRUMP ALSO
CALLED ON THOSE PRESENT TO HELP
BRING SYRIA'S SIX YEAR CIVIL WAR
TO AN END, AND SAVED HIS
SHARPEST WORDS FOR IRAN.
HE SAID IRAN HAS HELPED SYRIAN
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-ASSAD
COMMIT, "UNSPEAKABLE CRIMES,"
AND HE CALLED IRAN A"
DESTABILIZING" FORCE IN THE
MIDDLE EAST.
>> FROM LEBANON TO IRAQ TO
YEMEN, IRAN FUNDS ARMS AND
TRAINS TERRORISTS, MILITIAS AND
OTHER EXTREMIST GROUPS THAT
SPREAD DESTRUCTION AND CHAOS
ACROSS THE REGION.
FOR DECADES, IRAN HAS FUELED THE
FIRES OF SECTARIAN CONFLICT AND
TERROR.
IT IS A GOVERNMENT THAT SPEAKS
OPENLY OF MASS MURDER, VOWING
THE DESTRUCTION OF ISRAEL, DEATH
TO AMERICA AND RUIN FOR MANY
NATIONS AND LEADERS IN THIS VERY
ROOM.
>> Stewart: FOR SOME PERSPECTIVE
ON PRESIDENT TRUMP'S SPEECH, I
AM JOINED HERE IN THE STUDIO BY
GARY SICK, A SENIOR RESEARCH
SCHOLAR FROM COLUMBIA
UNIVERSITY'S SCHOOL OF
INTERNATIONAL AND PUBLIC
AFFAIRS.
HE SERVED ON THE NATIONAL
SECURITY COUNCIL FOR PRESIDENTS
CARTER, FORD, AND REAGAN.
AND IN WASHINGTON, FARAH
PANDITH, A SENIOR FELLOW WITH
THE COUNCIL OF FOREIGN RELATIONS
JOINS US.
SHE SERVES ON THE SECRETARY OF
HOMELAND SECURITY'S ADVISORY
COUNCIL AND PREVIOUSLY SERVED IN
THE OBAMA AND BUSH
ADMINISTRATIONS.
GARY, THERE SEEM TO BE A COUPLE
OF RECURRING THEMES IN THIS
SPEECH.
ONE THE LEADERS IN THIS ROOM
MUST STAND UP AGAINST TERRORISM
AND 2, IRAN IS A COMMON ENEMY.
WHAT DO YOU THINK ABOUT THE
PRESIDENT FOCUSING IN ON THOSE
TWO THEMES?
>> HE REALLY WANTED TO RESET THE
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE ISLAMIC
WORLD.
HIS CAMPAIGN WAS FULL OF ATTACKS
ON ISLAM IN GENERAL AND
BASICALLY TREATING EVERYBODY AS
A TERRORIST.
I THINK HE'S LEARNED A LOT SINCE
HE GOT INTO OFFICE.
HE MET WITH A LOT OF ISLAMIC
LEADERS AND COME TO A CONCLUSION
THAT THEY ARE NOT ALL THAT BAD
AND YOU CAN WORK WITH THEM.
IN FACT I THINK HE'S DISCOVERING
HE NEEDS TO WORK WITH THEM.
WITH REGARD TO THE OTHER SIDE OF
THAT AND THE WAY YOU DO IT IS TO
ADOPT THE POSITION THAT ALL OF
THOSE ARABS WERE TAKING.
I DON'T BELIEVE THERE WERE ANY
OTHER REPRESENTS OF SAY KURDS OR
SHIA WERE THERE.
WE SHARE YOUR VIEW COMPLETELY
THAT IRAN IS THE BAD GUY THAT
EVERYTHING THAT GOES WRONG IN
THE MIDDLE EAST IS BECAUSE OF
IRAN AND WE SHARE YOUR VIEW WITH
THAT WITHOUT EQUIVOCATION.
1 HE SAYS I'M NOT GOING TO
PREACH TO YOU, IN FACT CHANGING
THE TONE FROM WHERE PRESIDENT
OBAMA WAS, SAYING WE THINK THAT
THE WAY YOU TREAT YOUR OWN
PEOPLE IS IMPORTANT.
E-SET WE'RE NOT GOING TO BOTHER
TELLING YOU THAT, WE'RE NOT
GOING TO PREACH TO YOU AT ALL.
BUT THEN HE DID GO AHEAD AND
WHEN HE DECIDED TO PREACH IT WAS
TO IRAN.
AND BASICALLY HERE WAS A COUNTRY
ACROSS THE WATER WHO HAD AN
ELECTION, 57% OF THEM VOTED FOR
MODERATE GUY WHO WAS NOT
SUPPORTED NECESSARILY BY THE
SUPREME LEADER AND THAT WENT
UNMENTIONED.
>> I WANT TO BRING FARAH INTO
THE CONVERSATION.
THE PRESIDENT SPOKE ABOUT
GRADUAL REFORMS AND
INTERVENTION, HAVING TOLERANCE
FOR ONE ANOTHER BUT THAT ONE
PERIOD DRIVING THEM OUT FORCEFUL
LANK LANGUAGE THAT HE USED.
HOW WAS THAT RECEIVED BY THOSE
LEADERS AND HOW WAS IT RECEIVED
BY THE AVERAGE MUSLIM CITIZEN?
>> THE IDEA THAT MUSLIMS SHOULD
WORK TOGETHER TO FIGHT TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS IS NOT NEW.
WHAT WAS IMPORTANT AND HE DID IT
VERY STRONGLY WAS TO TALK ABOUT
THE IDEOLOGY THAT UNDERPINS
EXTREMISM YET HE DIDN'T GO INTO
SPECIFICS ABOUT WHERE THAT
IDEOLOGY CAME FROM.
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
UNDERSTAND THAT HERE HE IS IN
RIYADH, A COUNTRY THAT REALLY
HAS A LOT TO DO WITH THE SPREAD
OF VIOLENT IDEOLOGY AROUND THE
WORLD.
ISIS USES THE TEXTBOOKS FROM
SAUDI ARABIA, YOU KNOW, IN THEIR
SO-CALLED CALIPHATE.
SO THERE IS A CONNECTION THERE.
SO HE DANCED AROUND SOME OF
THE THEMES THAT WERE VERY
IMPORTANT BUT HE DIDN'T GET INTO
SPECIFICS.
THE SECOND PIECE, CERTAINLY, IS
THAT WHO WAS HE SPEAKING TO?
YES HE WAS SPEAKING TO THE
50-PLUS LEADERS OF MUSLIM
MAJORITY COUNTRIES AND IT WAS
VERY CLEAR THAT THIS SPEECH WAS
TO THEM.
IT WAS NOT TO MUSLIM COMMUNITIES
AROUND THE WORLD.
HE DID NOT DO THE KIND OF
EXTENSION TO COMMUNITIES THAT
YOU WOULD HAVE EXPECTED IF
THAT'S WHAT THE AUDIENCE REALLY
WAS.
FOR EXAMPLE WHILE HE TALKED
ABOUT THE DEM GRAPHIC OF YOUTH
IN THE MIDDLE EAST -- DEM
GRAPHIC OF YOUTH IN THE MIDDLE
EAST, LET'S REMEMBER, OVER A
BILLION MUSLIMS AROUND THE WORLD
THAT ARE UNDER THE AGE OF 30, HE
DID NOT TALK ABOUT THE FUTURE
THAT THEY CAN HAVE, IF THEY WORK
TOGETHER, AND HE DIDN'T OFFER
ANY DELIVERABLES IN THIS SPEECH
FOR THOSE YOUNG MUSLIMS.
WHICH IS A DIRECT CONTRAST
OBVIOUSLY TO PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
SPEECH IN CAIRO WHICH DID BOTH
THE THEMATIC PIECE AND ALSO THE
DELIVERABLE SIDE.
>> Stewart: WHAT DO YOU THINK
OF THE NEW TERRORISM TARGETING
CENTER, I DON'T THINK IT WAS
LOST ON ANYONE THAT THIS WAS
ANNOUNCED IN SAUDI ARABIA WHICH
HAS A HISTORY WE KNOW OF
FINANCING CERTAIN GROUPS.
>> IT IS INTERESTING AND
STRIKING THAT IN THAT ROOM WE
ARE LOOKING AT OTHER GULF STATES
WHO HAVE INVESTED IN BOTH THE
MESSAGING PIECE THE IDEOLOGIC
PIECE, HOW DO YOU PUSH BACK
AGAINST EXTREMISTS, AND THEY
HAVE BEEN PARTNERS WITH US IN
PUSHING BACK THE FINANCING.
I APPLAUD THE PRESIDENT FOR
CALLING OUT MUSLIM-MAJORITY
STATES TO DO MORE.
I THINK HE'S RIGHT TO DO THAT.
HE WAS ALSO RIGHT TO TALK ABOUT
AUTHENTICITY OF A MUSLIM VOICE
IN MUSLIM COMMUNITIES TO
ACTUALLY PROTECT THE SPREAD OF
THIS IDEOLOGY.
BUT IT DIDN'T MATCH WITH
WHAT THOSE MUSLIM MAJORITY
STATES ARE DOING.
THERE ARE CENTERS IN THE UAE
THAT ARE DOING WORK AROUND
MESSAGING.
SAUDI ARABIA IS A VERY IMPORTANT
PLAYER IN ALL OF THIS BECAUSE
HERE THE PRESIDENT IS TALKING
ABOUT A $400 BILLION DEAL
THAT HE WAS DELIVERING TO SAUDI
ARABIA AND OFFERING AMERICANS
THE OPPORTUNITY TO SAY THAT WE
ARE GOING TO GET JOBS FROM
THAT.
BUT WHAT I WOULD LIKE THE
PRESIDENT TO ALSO DO IS OFFER A
DEAL TO AMERICA AND THAT MEANS
USING HIS INFLUENCE TO MAKE SURE
THAT SAUDI ARABIA DOESN'T
INCITE HATE AROUND THE WORLD.
AND HE COULD HAVE OFFERED THAT
IN A WAY THAT WAS MORE CLEAR IN
THIS SPEECH.
SO THESE CENTERS THAT TALK ABOUT
FINANCING, THESE CENTERS THAT
TALK ABOUT MESSAGING, ARE
HOLLOW, IF THERE'S NO -- THERE
ARE NO TEETH BEHIND WHAT IS
ACTUALLY BEING SAID.
>> WE DIDN'T HEAR A LOT ABOUT
HUMAN RIGHTS.
THERE WAS A BRIEF NOD TO WOMEN.
WHY DO YOU THINK THESE IDEAS
WERE ABSENT?
>> I THINK THAT THE AUDIENCE IN
AMERICA IS PROBABLY VERY SHOCKED
TO SEE SO LITTLE ABOUT DEMOCRACY
AND FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS
FROM THIS PRESIDENT.
AND I THINK FOR MUSLIM
COMMUNITIES AROUND THE WORLD,
IT'S WHAT THEY WANT TO HEAR FROM
AMERICA, THAT WE STAND UP FOR
THOSE MINORITIES, THAT WE WORK
HARD TO ADVOCATE FOR THINGS THAT
ARE JUST AND TRUE.
AND IT IS AN UNCOMMON THING FOR
AN AMERICAN PRESIDENT NOT TO DO
THAT.
>> Stewart: GARY, WHAT DO YOU
THINK ABOUT THIS ABSENCE OF THE
DISCUSSION OF HUMAN RIGHTS OR
WOMEN'S RIGHTS?
>> THEY ACTUALLY COMPLAINED VERY
MUCH ABOUT PRESIDENT OBAMA
TALKING OVER THE HEADS OF THEIR
LEADERS TO THE PEOPLE AS IF THIS
WAS A BAD THING.
I NEVER SAW THAT AS A BAD THING.
I THOUGHT TALKING OVER THE HEADS
OF THESE LEADERS IF YOU LOOKED
AROUND THE ROOM WITH THE PEOPLE
WHO WERE THERE AND TALKING TO
THEIR PEOPLE DIRECTLY WASN'T A
BAD THING AT ALL AND THAT IS
SOMETHING AS FARAH SAID HE JUST
DIDN'T DO THAT.
IF YOU WANT A RESET OF U.S.
POLICY IN THE MIDDLE EAST HE
SAID WE'RE GOING TO RESET IT,
WE'RE GOING TO DEAL WITH LEADERS
WHEN ARE THERE REGARDLESS WHAT
THEIR BACKGROUNDS ARE AND
WHETHER WE SHARE THEIR VALUES OR
NOT, WE'RE NOT GOING TO WORRY
TOO MUCH ABOUT THEIR PEOPLE,
WE'RE NOT GOING TO WORRY ABOUT
THEIR YOUTH MOVEMENT, WE'RE
GOING TO DO DEALS WITH THEM,
WE'RE GOING TO GIVE THEM
SOMETHING AND THEY'RE GOING TO
GIVE US SOMETHING IN RETURN AND
THAT IS OUR NEW POLICY.
>> Stewart: FARAH YOUR THOUGHTS
ABOUT THIS?
>> THE U.S. TOOK THE FIRST STEP
TO GO TO SAUDI ARABIA WITH
THE PREMISE THAT THEY'RE GOING
TO THE HEART OF WHERE MUSLIMS
ARE AND THERE'S A PROBLEMATIC
SYMBOLISM WITH THAT.
SAUDI ARABIA WANTS YOU TO
BELIEVE THAT THEY SPEAK FOR ALL
OF ISLAM.
WHILE MOST MUSLIMS LIVE AS I
MENTIONED OUTSIDE THE MIDDLE
EAST, AND IN FACT I DON'T SEE
SAUDI ARABIA'S FORM OF ISLAM AS
THE RIGHT KIND OF ISLAM AND FOR
AMERICANS WE CANNOT DETERMINE
WHICH IS THE RIGHT SECT OR THE
WRONG SECT OF ISLAM BUT WE CAN
SAY TO A COUNTRY LIKE SAUDI
ARABIA THAT YOU DON'T HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO SPEAK FOR 1.6
BILLION PEOPLE AND WHAT WE DID
HERE IS WE LEGITIMIZED THEIR
VIEWPOINT THAT THEY ARE THE ONES
THAT ARE THE CENTER OF ISLAM.
AND I THINK THAT IS GOING TO BE
AN INTERESTING THING TO WATCH AS
THE WEEKS AND MONTHS GO AHEAD.
>> FARAH PANDITH AND GARY
SICK, THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR
YOUR ANALYSIS.
>> Stewart: SECRETARY OF STATE
REX TILLERSON IS CALLING TODAY'S
MISSILE TEST BY NORTH KOREA
"DISAPPOINTING" AND
"DISTURBING."
THE MEDIUM-RANGE MISSILE WAS
LAUNCHED FROM THE COUNTRY'S EAST
COAST AND TRAVELED 310 MILES
BEFORE CRASHING INTO THE SEA OF
JAPAN, ACCORDING TO SOUTH
KOREA'S MILITARY AND U.S.
PACIFIC COMMAND.
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS
SAY THE MISSILE'S RANGE WAS
SHORTER THAN THREE PREVIOUS
TESTS THIS YEAR.
SOUTH KOREA'S FOREIGN MINISTRY
CALLED THE TEST "RECKLESS AND
IRRESPONSIBLE," WHILE JAPAN'S
PRIME MINISTER SAID IT WAS A"
SNUB" TO EFFORTS TO ACHIEVE
PEACE ON THE KOREAN PENINSULA.
THE C.I.A. IS WORKING TO REBUILD
ITS CHINA SPY NETWORK, ACCORDING
TO THE "NEW YORK TIMES,"
FOLLOWING CHINA'S KILLING OF A
DOZEN C.I.A. INFORMANTS AND ITS
JAILING HALF-A-DOZEN MORE
BETWEEN 2010 AND 2012."
THE TIMES" SAYS THE NETWORK HAD
HELPED REVEAL "INNER WORKINGS OF
THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT," BUT
U.S. INTELLIGENCE OFFICIALS ARE
DIVIDED OVER HOW IT WAS
UNMASKED, WHETHER IT WAS A
BETRAYAL BY A MOLE INSIDE THE
C.I.A. OR CARELESSNESS BY THE
INFORMANTS, OR EVEN HACKING OF
AGENCY COMMUNICATIONS.
THE C.I.A. DID NOT COMMENT IN
THE STORY, WHICH WAS BASED ON
INTERVIEWS WITH CURRENT AND
FORMER GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS.
>> Stewart: THE UNITED STATES
RANKS FIRST AMONG DEVELOPED
NATIONS IN TEEN PREGNANCY AND
SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASES.
NUMEROUS STUDIES SHOW ONE
CONTRIBUTING FACTOR MAY BE WHAT
SCHOOLS ARE TEACHING, OR NOT
TEACHING, YOUNG PEOPLE ABOUT
SEX.
THE RESEARCH SHOWS A CORRELATION
BETWEEN HIGH TEEN PREGNANCY
RATES AND THE "ABSTINENCE ONLY
UNTIL MARRIAGE" CURRICULUM THAT
HAS SHAPED SEX-ED IN MUCH OF THE
COUNTRY DURING THE PAST TWO
DECADES.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
"NEWSHOUR WEEKEND" SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT YASMEEN QURESHI
WENT TO WEST VIRGINIA, A STATE
WITH ONE OF THE HIGHEST TEEN
PREGNANCY AND BIRTH RATES.
IT'S ALSO A STATE WHERE SOME
SCHOOLS ARE PUSHING MORE CANDID
AND COMPREHENSIVE "SEX ED".
>> USUALLY WHEN I TALK ABOUT SEX
EDUCATION I'M WITH TEACHERS,
NURSES, AND COUNSELORS.
>> Reporter: THESE TEACHERS AND
ADMINISTRATORS IN BECKLEY, WEST
VIRGINIA, ARE LEARNING HOW TO
TEACH STUDENTS COMPREHENSIVE SEX
EDUCATION.
PART OF THEIR DAY IS SPENT ROLE
PLAYING HOW TO ANSWER STUDENTS'
TOUGH QUESTIONS.
>> HOW DO YOU KNOW IF YOU'RE
READY TO MAYBE HAVE SEX?
>> Reporter: LOCAL EDUCATION
OFFICIALS, FRUSTRATED BY THE
STATE'S TEEN PREGNANCY RATE,
STARTED THIS INITIATIVE THREE
YEARS AGO.
NORA GELPERIN, FROM THE NON-
PROFIT ADVOCATES FOR YOUTH,
LEADS SESSIONS LIKE THIS ALL
OVER THE COUNTRY.
>> IT'S MORE THAN JUST CONDOMS
AND ABSTINENCE.
IT'S TALKING ABOUT RELATIONSHIPS
AND DATING VIOLENCE AND TALKING
ABOUT COMMUNICATION.
HOW DO YOU BREAK UP WITH
SOMEONE?
HOW DO YOU SAY NO IF SOMEONE'S
PUSHING YOU TO DO SOMETHING
YOU'RE NOT COMFORTABLE DOING?
ALL THOSE SKILLS THAT BOTH YOUNG
PEOPLE NEED, AND ADULTS NEED AS
WELL.
>> Reporter: WEST VIRGINIA
REQUIRES MIDDLE AND HIGH SCHOOL
HEALTH CLASSES TO COVER SEX
EDUCATION, BUT IT'S UP TO THE
DISCRETION OF THE INDIVIDUAL
PRINCIPALS AND TEACHERS HOW IN
DEPTH THEY TEACH IT.
THE ONLY MANDATORY TOPIC BY LAW
IS HIV, THE VIRUS THAT CAUSES
AIDS.
GELPERIN SAYS THERE'S NO
CONSISTENCY TO THE WAY SEX ED IS
TAUGHT WITHIN THE STATE OR
ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
>> IT'S A REAL PATCHWORK OF
POLICIES.
ABOUT HALF OF THE STATES
CURRENTLY HAVE A POLICY AT THE
STATE LEVEL AND HALF THE STATES
DON'T.
A LOT OF STUDENTS WILL TELL YOU
IT'S TOO LITTLE TOO LATE, IT
COMES TOO LATE IN THEIR
EDUCATION IF THEY GET IT AT ALL.
>> Reporter: SINCE THE 1990S,
TEEN PREGNANCY RATES HAVE
DECREASED ACROSS THE UNITED
STATES.
BUT IN THE MID-2000S, WEST
VIRGINIA'S RATE SPIKED IN THE
OPPOSITE DIRECTION.
TODAY, IT HAS THE SIXTH HIGHEST
TEEN BIRTH RATE OF THE 50
STATES.
KIERSTIN EDWARDS IS ONE OF THOSE
TEEN MOTHERS, RAISING HER TWO-
YEAR-OLD DAUGHTER, AUBREY, WHILE
STAYING IN HIGH SCHOOL.
EDWARDS GOT PREGNANT AT 14.
>> I WAS STILL A FRESHMAN, AND I
WAS JUST LIKE THERE'S NO
POSSIBLE WAY I COULD HAVE DONE
THAT.
AND IT WAS A BIG SURPRISE TO ME.
>> Reporter: A SURPRISE EVEN
THOUGH SHE SAYS SHE DIDN'T USE
CONTRACEPTION PROPERLY.
>> WE WERE YOUNG.
HE WAS MY FIRST.
WE DIDN'T USE AS MUCH PROTECTION
AS WE SHOULD HAVE, AND WE DIDN'T
TRY TO PREVENT IT, BUT WE ALSO
DIDN'T THINK THAT IT COULD
HAPPEN.
>> Reporter: BEFORE HER
PREGNANCY, EDWARDS HAD ONE SEX
ED CLASS A YEAR IN HER MIDDLE
SCHOOL.
>> IT WAS LIKE ONE, BASICALLY AN
HOUR, AND THEY TOLD US
EVERYTHING, AND THEN IN EIGHTH
GRADE THEY TOLD US EVERYTHING
AGAIN, BUT IT WAS LIKE, IT WAS
ONCE A YEAR WHEN THEY DID THIS.
>> Reporter: KIERSTIN'S MOTHER,
BRANDY SURRATT, IS HELPING RAISE
HER GRANDDAUGHTER AND BABYSITS
WHILE KIERSTEN ATTENDS SCHOOL.
SHE SAYS SHE TAUGHT HER DAUGHTER
ABOUT SEX.
>> IF THEY TEACH IT A LOT MORE
IN SCHOOL AND NOT ONLY AT HOME
TOO, YOU KNOW, I THINK THINGS
COULD HAVE BEEN PREVENTED.
>> Reporter: AND SO YOU'RE IN
FAVOR OF HAVING A MORE
COMPREHENSIVE SEX EDUCATION?
>> OH YES.
DON'T JUST TEACH THEM, "HEY,
ABSTINENCE IS THE BEST, HERE'S A
CONDOM."
NO, DON'T HAND THEM OUT CONDOMS,
TEACH THEM ABOUT ALL SORTS OF
DIFFERENT BIRTH CONTROLS.
YOU'RE NOT GOING TO CHANGE A
TEENAGER'S HORMONES NO MATTER
HOW MUCH YOU PREACH.
IT'S NOT GOING TO WORK, BECAUSE
TEENAGERS ARE HORMONAL, AND
THINGS HAPPEN.
>> OF EVERY EIGHT BABIES THAT
WERE BORN IN WEST VIRGINIA, ONE
WAS BORN TO A TEEN MOTHER.
I MEAN, I THINK THAT'S, THAT'S
CRAZY.
>> Reporter: SELINA VICKERS IS A
STATE HEALTH COORDINATOR WHO IS
TRYING TO IMPROVE THE SEX ED
CURRICULUM.
>> WEST VIRGINIA IS A VERY HIGH
POVERTY STATE ANYWAY.
TEEN PREGNANCY IS JUST PART OF
THE CYCLE OF POVERTY, AND IF WE
WANT OUR KIDS TO BREAK THE
POVERTY CYCLE, WE HAVE TO STOP
THEM FROM BECOMING MOTHERS AND
FATHERS BEFORE THEY'RE READY.
>> Reporter: MOTIVATED BY
STUDIES SHOWING THAT TEENAGE
GIRLS WHO ARE TAUGHT
COMPREHENSIVE SEX ED ARE LESS
LIKELY TO BECOME PREGNANT,
VICKERS STARTED TRAINING
TEACHERS IN A CURRICULUM THAT'S
BEEN ADOPTED ACROSS THE U.S.
CALLED FLASH.
IT COVERS NOT ONLY ABSTINENCE,
BUT ALSO CONSENT, BIRTH CONTROL,
SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASES,
SEXUAL ORIENTATION, AND SEXUAL
ABUSE.
SO FAR, SCHOOLS IN ONLY 20 OF
THE STATE'S 55 COUNTIES USE
FLASH.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT FUNDS A
SIMILAR PROGRAM, BUT ALSO STILL
PROMOTES ABSTINENCE-ONLY THROUGH
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH GRANTS THAT
STARTED IN THE 1980S.
WEST VIRGINIA IS ONE OF 35
STATES STILL GETTING THE FUNDS,
DESPITE STUDIES SHOWING THAT
ABSTINENCE-ONLY HAS "NO OVERALL
IMPACT ON TEEN SEXUAL ACTIVITY"
AND, "CAN CAUSE AN INCREASE IN
TEEN BIRTH RATES."
>> WE'VE PUT MILLIONS AND
MILLIONS AND MILLIONS OF DOLLARS
INTO ABSTINENCE ONLY PROGRAMS,
AND WHAT EVERY BIT OF RESEARCH
HAS SHOWN IS THAT IT DOES NOT
WORK.
KIDS THAT GO THROUGH ABSTINENCE
ONLY OFTEN HAVE MUCH HIGHER
RATES OF STDS AND PREGNANCY,
BECAUSE THEY DIDN'T HAVE ANOTHER
OPTION, THEY DIDN'T KNOW WHAT,
HOW TO PROTECT THEMSELVES.
>> Reporter: IN RURAL McDOWELL
COUNTY, AS RECENTLY AS 2012, ONE
IN TEN TEENAGE GIRLS BECAME
PREGNANT, WHICH WAS THE HIGHEST
RATE IN WEST VIRGINIA.
THAT'S WHY NELSON SPENCER BECAME
ONE OF THE FIRST SCHOOL
SUPERINTENDENTS IN THE STATE TO
ADOPT THE FLASH CURRICULUM, IN
2014.
>> WE ALWAYS GIVE THE PARENTS
THE CHOICE TO OPT OUT OF ANY
CLASS THAT WE HAVE THAT THEY
WOULD THINK WOULD BE
CONTROVERSIAL, SO IT'S NOT
FORCED UPON ANY STUDENT THAT
DOES NOT WANT TO HAVE THAT
EDUCATION.
WHETHER IT'S SEX EDUCATION,
WHETHER IT'S ENGLISH, WE WANT
OUR KIDS TO BE PREPARED TO GO IN
THE FUTURE AND BE KNOWLEDGEABLE
ABOUT ANY TOPIC THAT COMES ALONG
THAT WE TEACH IN McDOWELL
COUNTY.
>> Reporter: IN ADDITION TO THE
NEW FLASH CURRICULUM, McDOWELL
COUNTY SCHOOLS OFFER AN AFTER
SCHOOL ELECTIVE SEX ED PROGRAM
CALLED "TEEN TALK."
15-YEAR-OLD MONTANA DYE AND 17-
YEAR-OLD RACHEL HENDRICKSON
ATTENDED.
BOTH SAY THEY BARELY HAD ANY SEX
ED IN MIDDLE SCHOOL.
>> WE HAD HEALTH, AND THAT WAS
ABOUT IT.
AND THEY WENT OVER LIKE THE BONE
STRUCTURE AND DIETING AND
EXERCISING.
>> Reporter: HOW MUCH KNOWLEDGE
DID YOU HAVE BEFORE YOU TOOK THE
AFTER SCHOOL PROGRAM?
>> I DIDN'T KNOW THAT MUCH ABOUT
TEEN PREGNANCY AND STUFF AND HOW
MUCH IT-- IT ACTUALLY MATTERS.
BECAUSE I DIDN'T BELIEVE THAT IT
MATTERS THAT MUCH AND HOW MUCH
IT COST TO, LIKE, KEEP CARE OF A
KID.
>> Reporter: SO WHAT WERE SOME
OF THE GAPS IN YOUR KNOWLEDGE
ABOUT SEX EDUCATION?
>> THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF BIRTH
CONTROL.
I THOUGHT IT WAS JUST THE PILL
AND A CONDOM, BUT THERE'S MUCH
MORE TO IT.
THAT YOU CAN GET AN INJECTION IN
YOUR ARM TO PREVENT IT.
>> Reporter: DID YOU FIND THAT
INFORMATION HELPFUL?
>> YEAH, YEAH, IT REALLY DID
HELP.
>> Reporter: DAVE PERRY, A
TEACHER AND PRINCIPAL FOR 35
YEARS WHO SITS ON THE STATE
BOARD OF EDUCATION SAYS HE
PREFERS A SIMPLE SEX ED
CURRICULUM THAT STRESSES
ABSTINENCE ONLY.
>> WELL, IT'S FUNDAMENTAL,
BECAUSE IT'S BIBLICAL.
AND I THINK ABSTINENCE IS
FOOLPROOF, 100%.
ANYTHING APART FROM THAT, AS FAR
AS CONTRACEPTIVES AND SO FORTH,
HAS A MARGIN OF ERROR, BUT
ABSTINENCE DOESN'T.
>> Reporter: PERRY SAYS HIS
RELIGIOUS OBJECTIONS TO TEACHING
MORE THAN THE MINIMUM ABOUT SEX
ARE SHARED BY MANY PEOPLE IN
THIS STATE.
>> I THINK IT'S MORE
RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS, AND
PARENTS HAVE A RIGHT TO DO THAT,
AND I THINK AS EDUCATION, WE'VE
BECOME MORE SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
THAN WE HAVE EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS.
AND WE'RE DEALING QUITE A BIT
WITH SOCIAL PROBLEMS AND ISSUES
THAT I DON'T THINK OUR EDUCATORS
ARE THAT QUALIFIED OR CERTIFIED
TO ADDRESS.
>> Reporter: PERRY WORRIES
COMPREHENSIVE SEX ED COULD MAKE
TEENAGERS WANT TO HAVE SEX.
>> WITH CONTRACEPTIVES AND
CONDOMS AND SO FORTH, I THINK
IT'S AN ENCOURAGEMENT.
YOU KNOW, IT'S A GREEN LIGHT
THAT THIS IS POSSIBLE WITHOUT
BEARING CHILDREN.
SO, I THINK TO WHAT EXTENT AND
TO WHAT EXTENT YOU TEACH, WHAT
YOU TEACH YOU GET.
>> IF YOU START TALKING ABOUT
SEX, IT DOESN'T MAKE, YOU KNOW,
TEENAGERS RUN DOWN THE STREET
AND BE SEXUALLY ACTIVE.
>> Reporter: JENNIE YOOST, AN
OBGYN AFFILIATED WITH MARSHALL
UNIVERSITY IN NEARBY HUNTINGTON,
TEACHES TEEN TALK.
>> ABSTINENCE ONLY WORKS IF
YOU'RE ABSTINENT, AND WHAT WE
KNOW ABOUT TEENAGERS IS THAT IN
NINTH GRADE ABOUT 30%, THIS IS
NATIONWIDE DATA, 30% IN NINTH
GRADE ARE SEXUALLY ACTIVE.
THAT NUMBER GOES UP TO CLOSE TO
60% BY TWELFTH GRADE.
WHEN WE LOOK AT ACTUALLY
COMPREHENSIVE SEX EDUCATION AND
COVERING ALL OF THESE TOPICS,
YOU KNOW, DATA HAS SHOWN THAT,
YOU KNOW, THOSE STUDENTS THAT
PARTICIPATE IN THOSE PROGRAMS
HAVE, YOU KNOW, LESS, THEY DELAY
SEXUAL ACTIVITY, THEY HAVE LESS
SEXUAL PARTNERS OR MORE
COMPLIANT WITH THINGS LIKE
CONDOMS AND CONTRACEPTION.
>> Reporter: EIGHTEEN-YEAR-OLD
HIGH SCHOOL SENIOR ISOM BAILEY
ALSO ATTENDED TEEN TALK.
>> I WANTED TO LEARN ABOUT A
HEALTHY RELATIONSHIP AND THE
STDs AND HOW TO PREVENT LIKE
HAVING A CHILD AND STUFF,
BECAUSE I'M NOT FINANCIAL
STABLE.
I WOULD LIKE TO LEARN THE
MISTAKES THAT CAN HAPPEN.
>> Reporter: ISOM'S OLDER SISTER
HAD HER FIRST BABY AT 16.
ISOM SAYS HE AND HIS GIRLFRIEND
PLAN TO DELAY SEX.
>> I PROMISED HER THAT I WOULD
WAIT UNTIL AFTER MARRIAGE,
BECAUSE IT'S SPECIAL TO ME,
BECAUSE KIDS ALL THE TIME TALK
ABOUT HAVING SEX AND JUST BEING
WITH SOMEONE IN THE BED, AND I
DON'T THINK LIKE THAT.
I THINK THAT YOU SHOULD BE MORE
RESPECTFUL TO THEM AND NOT JUST
THINK ABOUT YOURSELF AND YOUR
OWN NEEDS AND WANTS.
>> Reporter: BEYOND THE NEW
CURRICULUM AND AFTER SCHOOL
PROGRAM, McDOWELL COUNTY MEDICAL
CLINICS THAT OPERATE INSIDE THE
HIGH SCHOOLS OFFER TEENS FREE
CONTRACEPTION, INCLUDING
CONDOMS, AND THE PILL, WITHOUT
PARENTAL CONSENT.
WHILE THESE CONTROVERSIAL
CHANGES ARE IN THE EARLY STAGES,
SCHOOL SUPERINTENDENT NELSON
SPENCER BELIEVES THEY ARE HAVING
AN IMPACT.
>> WE WANT THEM TO BE EDUCATED
ABOUT ALL FACETS OF LIFE AND TO
BE ABLE TO MAKE THE RIGHT CHOICE
FOR THEM AND MAKE THE CHOICE
THAT'S GOING TO BENEFIT THEM IN
THE FUTURE.
>> Stewart: THERE IS A SURGE OF
UNACCOMPANIED CHILDREN AROUND
THE WORLD FLEEING POVERTY AND
VIOLENCE.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour TO LEARN
MORE.
>> Stewart: FINALLY, THE
RINGLING BROTHERS AND BARNUM AND
BAILEY CIRCUS ENDS TONIGHT,
FOREVER.
AFTER 146 YEARS, THE CIRCUS IS
STAGING ITS FINAL SHOW ON NEW
YORK'S LONG ISLAND.
THE SHOW'S ELEPHANTS HAVE
ALREADY GONE TO A NATURE
PRESERVE IN FLORIDA, AND THE
REST OF ITS ANIMALS ARE GETTING
NEW HOMES.
THE CIRCUS WAS DONE IN BY RISING
OPERATING COSTS AND FALLING
ATTENDANCE.
TOMORROW ON THE NEWSHOUR,
PRESIDENT TRUMP IS IN ISRAEL AS
OUR COVERAGE OF HIS FIRST
FOREIGN TRIP CONTINUES.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.